README.rst, before:

=============================
pyinaturalist
=============================

.. image:: https://www.travis-ci.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist.svg?branch=master
    :target: https://www.travis-ci.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist
    :alt: Build Status
.. image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/pyinaturalist/badge/?version=latest
    :target: https://pyinaturalist.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest
    :alt: Documentation Status
.. image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/niconoe/pyinaturalist/badge.svg?branch=dev
    :target: https://coveralls.io/github/niconoe/pyinaturalist?branch=dev
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyinaturalist?color=blue
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/pyinaturalist
    :alt: PyPI
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyinaturalist
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/pyinaturalist
    :alt: PyPI - Python Version
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/format/pyinaturalist?color=blue
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/pyinaturalist
    :alt: PyPI - Format

Python client for the `iNaturalist APIs <https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/api+reference>`_.
See full documentation at `<https://pyinaturalist.readthedocs.io>`_.

Installation
------------

Install with pip::

    $ pip install pyinaturalist

Or, if you would like to use the latest development (non-stable) version::

    $ pip install --pre pyinaturalist

Or, to set up for local development (preferably in a new virtualenv)::

    $ git clone https://github.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist.git
    $ cd pyinaturalist
    $ pip install -Ue ".[dev]"

Development Status
------------------
Pyinaturalist is under active development. Currently, a handful of the most relevant API endpoints
are implemented, including:

* Searching, creating, and updating observations and observation fields
* Searching for places, species, and species counts
* Text search autocompletion for species and places

See below for some examples,
see `Reference <https://pyinaturalist.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html>`_ for a complete list, and
see `Issues <https://github.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist/issues>`_ for planned & proposed features.
More endpoints will continue to be added as they are needed. PRs are welcome!

.. note::
    The two iNaturalist APIs expose a combined total of 103 endpoints. Many of these are primarily for
    internal use by the iNaturalist web application and mobile apps, and are unlikely to be added unless
    there are specific use cases for them.

.. 37 in REST API, 65 in Node API, 1 undocumented as of 2020-06-11

Examples
--------

Observations
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Search observations:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_all_observations
    obs = get_all_observations(params={'user_id': 'niconoe'})

See `available parameters <https://api.inaturalist.org/v1/docs/#!/Observations/get_observations/>`_.

Get an access token:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For authenticated API calls (creating/updating/deleting data), you first need to obtain an access token.
This requires creating an `iNaturalist app <https://www.inaturalist.org/oauth/applications/new>`_.

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import get_access_token
    token = get_access_token(
        username='<your_inaturalist_username>',
        password='<your_inaturalist_password>',
        app_id='<your_inaturalist_app_id>',
        app_secret='<your_inaturalist_app_secret>',
    )

Create a new observation:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import create_observations
    params = {'observation':
                {'taxon_id': 54327,  # Vespa Crabro
                 'observed_on_string': datetime.datetime.now().isoformat(),
                 'time_zone': 'Brussels',
                 'description': 'This is a free text comment for the observation',
                 'tag_list': 'wasp, Belgium',
                 'latitude': 50.647143,
                 'longitude': 4.360216,
                 'positional_accuracy': 50, # meters,

                 # sets vespawatch_id (an observation field whose ID is 9613) to the value '100'.
                 'observation_field_values_attributes':
                    [{'observation_field_id': 9613,'value': 100}],
                 },
    }

    r = create_observations(params=params, access_token=token)
    new_observation_id = r[0]['id']

Upload a picture for this observation:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import add_photo_to_observation
    r = add_photo_to_observation(observation_id=new_observation_id,
                                 file_object=open('/Users/nicolasnoe/vespa.jpg', 'rb'),
                                 access_token=token)

Update an existing observation of yours:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

        from pyinaturalist.rest_api import update_observation
        p = {'ignore_photos': 1,  # Otherwise existing pictures will be deleted
             'observation': {'description': 'updated description !'}}
        r = update_observation(observation_id=17932425, params=p, access_token=token)

Get a list of all (globally available) observation fields:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import get_all_observation_fields
    r = get_all_observation_fields(search_query="DNA")

Set an observation field value on an existing observation:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import put_observation_field_values
    put_observation_field_values(
        observation_id=7345179,
        observation_field_id=9613,
        value=250,
        access_token=token,
    )

Get observation data in alternative formats:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A separate endpoint can provide other data formats, including Darwin Core, KML, and CSV:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import get_observations
    obs = get_observations(user_id='niconoe', response_format='dwc')

See `available parameters and formats <https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/api+reference#get-observations>`_.

Get observation species counts:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
There is an additional endpoint to get counts of observations by species.
On the iNaturalist web UI, this information can be found on the 'Species' tab of search results.
For example, to get the counts of all your own research-grade observations:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_observation_species_counts
    obs_counts = get_observation_species_counts(user_id='my_username', quality_grade='research')


Taxonomy
^^^^^^^^

Search species and other taxa:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say you partially remember either a genus or family name that started with **'vespi'**-something:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_taxa
    >>> response = get_taxa(q="vespi", rank=["genus", "family"])
    >>> print({taxon["id"]: taxon["name"] for taxon in response["results"]})
    {52747: "Vespidae", 84737: "Vespina", 92786: "Vespicula", 646195: "Vespiodes", ...}

Oh, that's right, it was **'Vespidae'**! Now let's find all of its subfamilies using its taxon ID
from the results above:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> response = get_taxa(parent_id=52747)
    >>> print({taxon["id"]: taxon["name"] for taxon in response["results"]})
    {343248: "Polistinae", 84738: "Vespinae", 119344: "Eumeninae", 121511: "Masarinae", ...}

Get a species by ID:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's find out more about this 'Polistinae' genus. We could search for it by name or by ID,
but since we already know the ID from the previous search, let's use that:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_taxa_by_id
    >>> response = get_taxa_by_id(343248)

There is a lot of info in there, but let's just get the basics for now:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> basic_fields = ["preferred_common_name", "observations_count", "wikipedia_url", "wikipedia_summary"]
    >>> print({f: response["results"][0][f] for f in basic_fields})
    {
        "preferred_common_name": "Paper Wasps",
        "observations_count": 69728,
        "wikipedia_url": "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polistinae",
        "wikipedia_summary": "The Polistinae are eusocial wasps closely related to the more familiar yellow jackets...",
    }

Taxon autocomplete
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This is a text search-optimized endpoint that provides autocompletion in the Naturalist web UI:

.. image:: docs/images/taxon_autocomplete.png
    :alt: Taxon autocompletion in the iNaturalist web UI
    :scale: 60%

This one is a bit more niche, but it provides a fast way to search the iNaturalist taxonomy
database. Here is an example that will run searches from console input:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_taxa_autocomplete

    while True:
        query = input("> ")
        response = get_taxa_autocomplete(q=query, minify=True)
        print("\n".join(response["results"]))

Example usage::

    > opilio
    527573:        Genus Opilio
     47367:        Order Opiliones (Harvestmen)
     84644:      Species Phalangium opilio (European Harvestman)
    527419:    Subfamily Opilioninae
    ...
    > coleo
    372759:     Subclass Coleoidea (Coleoids)
     47208:        Order Coleoptera (Beetles)
    359229:      Species Coleotechnites florae (Coleotechnites Flower Moth)
     53502:        Genus Brickellia (brickellbushes)
    ...
    <Ctrl-C>

If you get unexpected matches, the search likely matched a synonym, either in the form of a
common name or an alternative classification. Check the ``matched_term`` property for more
info. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> first_result = get_taxa_autocomplete(q='zygoca')['results'][0]
    >>> first_result["name"]
    "Schlumbergera truncata"
    >>> first_result["matched_term"]
    "Zygocactus truncatus"  # An older synonym for Schlumbergera


Dry-run mode
------------
While developing & testing an application that uses an API client like pyinaturalist, it can be
useful to temporarily mock out HTTP requests, especially requests that add, modify, or delete
real data. Pyinaturalist has some settings to make this easier.

Dry-run all requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To enable dry-run mode, set the ``DRY_RUN_ENABLED`` variable. When set, requests will not be sent
but will be logged instead:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import logging
    >>> import pyinaturalist

    # Enable at least INFO-level logging
    >>> logging.basicConfig(level='INFO')

    >>> pyinaturalist.DRY_RUN_ENABLED = True
    >>> get_taxa(q='warbler', locale=1)
    {'results': [], 'total_results': 0}
    INFO:pyinaturalist.api_requests:Request: GET, https://api.inaturalist.org/v1/taxa,
        params={'q': 'warbler', 'locale': 1},
        headers={'Accept': 'application/json', 'User-Agent': 'Pyinaturalist/0.9.1'}

Or, if you are running your application in a command-line environment, you can set this as an
environment variable instead (case-insensitive):

.. code-block:: bash

    $ export DRY_RUN_ENABLED=true
    $ python my_script.py

Dry-run only write requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
If you would like to run ``GET`` requests but mock out any requests that modify data
(``POST``, ``PUT``, ``DELETE``, etc.), you can use the ``DRY_RUN_WRITE_ONLY`` variable
instead:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> pyinaturalist.DRY_RUN_WRITE_ONLY = True

    # Also works as an environment variable
    >>> import os
    >>> os.environ["DRY_RUN_WRITE_ONLY"] = 'True'

Commit message:

Add ["extras"] to setup.py to install forge (and any other optional dependencies in the future); some README edits & formatting

README.rst, after:

=============================
pyinaturalist
=============================

.. image:: https://www.travis-ci.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist.svg?branch=master
    :target: https://www.travis-ci.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist
    :alt: Build Status
.. image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/pyinaturalist/badge/?version=latest
    :target: https://pyinaturalist.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest
    :alt: Documentation Status
.. image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/niconoe/pyinaturalist/badge.svg?branch=dev
    :target: https://coveralls.io/github/niconoe/pyinaturalist?branch=dev
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyinaturalist?color=blue
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/pyinaturalist
    :alt: PyPI
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyinaturalist
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/pyinaturalist
    :alt: PyPI - Python Version
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/format/pyinaturalist?color=blue
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/pyinaturalist
    :alt: PyPI - Format

Python client for the `iNaturalist APIs <https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/api+reference>`_.
See full documentation at `<https://pyinaturalist.readthedocs.io>`_.

Installation
------------

Install the latest stable version with pip::

    $ pip install pyinaturalist["extras"]

Or, if you would like to use the latest development (non-stable) version::

    $ pip install --pre pyinaturalist["extras"]

Note that ``["extras"]`` will include dependencies that are recommended but not required for usage.
pyinaturalist will function just fine without them, but will lack certain conveniences,
such as full API documentation and type checking within an IDE.

To set up for local development (preferably in a new virtualenv)::

    $ git clone https://github.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist.git
    $ cd pyinaturalist
    $ pip install -Ue ".[dev]"

Development Status
------------------
Pyinaturalist is under active development. Currently, a handful of the most relevant API endpoints
are implemented, including:

* Searching, creating, and updating observations and observation fields
* Searching for places, species, and species counts
* Text search autocompletion for species and places

See below for some examples,
see `Reference <https://pyinaturalist.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html>`_ for a complete list, and
see `Issues <https://github.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist/issues>`_ for planned & proposed features.
More endpoints will continue to be added as they are needed.
Please **create an issue** if there is an endpoint you would like to have added, and **PRs are welcome!**

.. note::
    The two iNaturalist APIs expose a combined total of 103 endpoints\*. Many of these are primarily for
    internal use by the iNaturalist web application and mobile apps, and are unlikely to be added unless
    there are specific use cases for them.

    \*37 in REST API, 65 in Node API, and 1 undocumented as of 2020-09-01

Examples
--------

Observations
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Search observations:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_all_observations
    obs = get_all_observations(params={'user_id': 'niconoe'})

See `available parameters <https://api.inaturalist.org/v1/docs/#!/Observations/get_observations/>`_.

Get an access token:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For authenticated API calls (creating/updating/deleting data), you first need to obtain an access token.
This requires creating an `iNaturalist app <https://www.inaturalist.org/oauth/applications/new>`_.

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import get_access_token
    token = get_access_token(
        username='<your_inaturalist_username>',
        password='<your_inaturalist_password>',
        app_id='<your_inaturalist_app_id>',
        app_secret='<your_inaturalist_app_secret>',
    )

Create a new observation:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import create_observations
    params = {'observation':
                {'taxon_id': 54327,  # Vespa Crabro
                 'observed_on_string': datetime.datetime.now().isoformat(),
                 'time_zone': 'Brussels',
                 'description': 'This is a free text comment for the observation',
                 'tag_list': 'wasp, Belgium',
                 'latitude': 50.647143,
                 'longitude': 4.360216,
                 'positional_accuracy': 50, # meters,

                 # sets vespawatch_id (an observation field whose ID is 9613) to the value '100'.
                 'observation_field_values_attributes':
                    [{'observation_field_id': 9613,'value': 100}],
                 },
    }

    r = create_observations(params=params, access_token=token)
    new_observation_id = r[0]['id']

Upload a picture for this observation:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import add_photo_to_observation
    r = add_photo_to_observation(observation_id=new_observation_id,
                                 file_object=open('/Users/nicolasnoe/vespa.jpg', 'rb'),
                                 access_token=token)

Update an existing observation of yours:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

        from pyinaturalist.rest_api import update_observation
        p = {'ignore_photos': 1,  # Otherwise existing pictures will be deleted
             'observation': {'description': 'updated description !'}}
        r = update_observation(observation_id=17932425, params=p, access_token=token)

Get a list of all (globally available) observation fields:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import get_all_observation_fields
    r = get_all_observation_fields(search_query="DNA")

Set an observation field value on an existing observation:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import put_observation_field_values
    put_observation_field_values(
        observation_id=7345179,
        observation_field_id=9613,
        value=250,
        access_token=token,
    )

Get observation data in alternative formats:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A separate endpoint can provide other data formats, including Darwin Core, KML, and CSV:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.rest_api import get_observations
    obs = get_observations(user_id='niconoe', response_format='dwc')

See `available parameters and formats <https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/api+reference#get-observations>`_.

Get observation species counts:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
There is an additional endpoint to get counts of observations by species.
On the iNaturalist web UI, this information can be found on the 'Species' tab of search results.
For example, to get the counts of all your own research-grade observations:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_observation_species_counts
    obs_counts = get_observation_species_counts(user_id='my_username', quality_grade='research')


Taxonomy
^^^^^^^^

Search species and other taxa:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say you partially remember either a genus or family name that started with **'vespi'**-something:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_taxa
    >>> response = get_taxa(q="vespi", rank=["genus", "family"])
    >>> print({taxon["id"]: taxon["name"] for taxon in response["results"]})
    {52747: "Vespidae", 84737: "Vespina", 92786: "Vespicula", 646195: "Vespiodes", ...}

Oh, that's right, it was **'Vespidae'**! Now let's find all of its subfamilies using its taxon ID
from the results above:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> response = get_taxa(parent_id=52747)
    >>> print({taxon["id"]: taxon["name"] for taxon in response["results"]})
    {343248: "Polistinae", 84738: "Vespinae", 119344: "Eumeninae", 121511: "Masarinae", ...}

Get a species by ID:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's find out more about this 'Polistinae' genus. We could search for it by name or by ID,
but since we already know the ID from the previous search, let's use that:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_taxa_by_id
    >>> response = get_taxa_by_id(343248)

There is a lot of info in there, but let's just get the basics for now:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> basic_fields = ["preferred_common_name", "observations_count", "wikipedia_url", "wikipedia_summary"]
    >>> print({f: response["results"][0][f] for f in basic_fields})
    {
        "preferred_common_name": "Paper Wasps",
        "observations_count": 69728,
        "wikipedia_url": "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polistinae",
        "wikipedia_summary": "The Polistinae are eusocial wasps closely related to the more familiar yellow jackets...",
    }

Taxon autocomplete
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This is a text search-optimized endpoint that provides autocompletion in the Naturalist web UI:

.. image:: docs/images/taxon_autocomplete.png
    :alt: Taxon autocompletion in the iNaturalist web UI
    :scale: 60%

This one is a bit more niche, but it provides a fast way to search the iNaturalist taxonomy
database. Here is an example that will run searches from console input:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_taxa_autocomplete

    while True:
        query = input("> ")
        response = get_taxa_autocomplete(q=query, minify=True)
        print("\n".join(response["results"]))

Example usage::

    > opilio
    527573:        Genus Opilio
     47367:        Order Opiliones (Harvestmen)
     84644:      Species Phalangium opilio (European Harvestman)
    527419:    Subfamily Opilioninae
    ...
    > coleo
    372759:     Subclass Coleoidea (Coleoids)
     47208:        Order Coleoptera (Beetles)
    359229:      Species Coleotechnites florae (Coleotechnites Flower Moth)
     53502:        Genus Brickellia (brickellbushes)
    ...
    <Ctrl-C>

If you get unexpected matches, the search likely matched a synonym, either in the form of a
common name or an alternative classification. Check the ``matched_term`` property for more
info. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> first_result = get_taxa_autocomplete(q='zygoca')['results'][0]
    >>> first_result["name"]
    "Schlumbergera truncata"
    >>> first_result["matched_term"]
    "Zygocactus truncatus"  # An older synonym for Schlumbergera


Dry-run mode
------------
While developing & testing an application that uses an API client like pyinaturalist, it can be
useful to temporarily mock out HTTP requests, especially requests that add, modify, or delete
real data. Pyinaturalist has some settings to make this easier.

Dry-run all requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To enable dry-run mode, set the ``DRY_RUN_ENABLED`` variable. When set, requests will not be sent
but will be logged instead:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import logging
    >>> import pyinaturalist

    # Enable at least INFO-level logging
    >>> logging.basicConfig(level='INFO')

    >>> pyinaturalist.DRY_RUN_ENABLED = True
    >>> get_taxa(q='warbler', locale=1)
    {'results': [], 'total_results': 0}
    INFO:pyinaturalist.api_requests:Request: GET, https://api.inaturalist.org/v1/taxa,
        params={'q': 'warbler', 'locale': 1},
        headers={'Accept': 'application/json', 'User-Agent': 'Pyinaturalist/0.9.1'}

Or, if you are running your application in a command-line environment, you can set this as an
environment variable instead (case-insensitive):

.. code-block:: bash

    $ export DRY_RUN_ENABLED=true
    $ python my_script.py

Dry-run only write requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
If you would like to run ``GET`` requests but mock out any requests that modify data
(``POST``, ``PUT``, ``DELETE``, etc.), you can use the ``DRY_RUN_WRITE_ONLY`` variable
instead:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> pyinaturalist.DRY_RUN_WRITE_ONLY = True

    # Also works as an environment variable
    >>> import os
    >>> os.environ["DRY_RUN_WRITE_ONLY"] = 'True'
