docs/examples.rst, before:

Examples
========
Below are some examples of building data visualizations and other neat things using
iNaturalist data. These can also be found in the
`examples/ <https://github.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist/tree/main/examples>`_ folder on GitHub.

Notebooks
---------
Example Jupter notebooks. To run these more easily, see
`pyinaturalist-notebook <https://github.com/JWCook/pyinaturalist-notebook>`_ for a Jupyter container
with all prerequisites installed.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2

    examples/Data Visualizations - Regional Activity Report.ipynb
    examples/Data Visualizations - Regional Observation Stats.ipynb
    examples/Data Visualizations - Seaborn.ipynb
    examples/Data Visualizations - Matplotlib.ipynb

.. examples/observations_to_gpx.py


.. TODO: Can't generate thumbnails for Altair visualizations
.. .. nbgallery::
..     :caption: This is a thumbnail gallery
..     :name: nb-gallery
..
..     ../examples/Data Visualizations - Regional Observation Stats.ipynb


Scripts
-------

Convert observations to GPX                     
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. include:: ../examples/observations_to_gpx.py
    :start-line: 2
    :end-line: 6

.. admonition:: Example code
    :class: toggle

    .. literalinclude:: ../examples/observations_to_gpx.py
        :lines: 1,8-

Observation photo metadata                
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. include:: ../examples/observation_photo_metadata.py
    :start-line: 2
    :end-line: 17

.. admonition:: Example code
    :class: toggle

    .. literalinclude:: ../examples/observation_photo_metadata.py
        :lines: 1,19-

Commit message:

Add stub Dockerfile and badges to run pyinaturalist-notebook on Binder
And yes I am excited about this so I put links for it *everywhere*

docs/examples.rst, after:

Examples
========
Below are some examples of building data visualizations and other neat things using
iNaturalist data. These can also be found in the
`examples/ <https://github.com/niconoe/pyinaturalist/tree/main/examples>`_ folder on GitHub.

Notebooks
---------
Example Jupter notebooks. Click the badge below to try them out in your browser using Binder:

.. image:: https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg
 :target: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/niconoe/pyinaturalist/main?filepath=examples

This uses the
`pyinaturalist-notebook <https://github.com/JWCook/pyinaturalist-notebook>`_
Docker image, which you can also use to run these examples on a local Jupyter server.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2

    examples/Data Visualizations - Regional Activity Report.ipynb
    examples/Data Visualizations - Regional Observation Stats.ipynb
    examples/Data Visualizations - Seaborn.ipynb
    examples/Data Visualizations - Matplotlib.ipynb

.. examples/observations_to_gpx.py


.. TODO: Can't generate thumbnails for Altair visualizations
.. .. nbgallery::
..     :caption: This is a thumbnail gallery
..     :name: nb-gallery
..
..     ../examples/Data Visualizations - Regional Observation Stats.ipynb


Scripts
-------

Convert observations to GPX                     
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. include:: ../examples/observations_to_gpx.py
    :start-line: 2
    :end-line: 6

.. admonition:: Example code
    :class: toggle

    .. literalinclude:: ../examples/observations_to_gpx.py
        :lines: 1,8-

Observation photo metadata                
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. include:: ../examples/observation_photo_metadata.py
    :start-line: 2
    :end-line: 17

.. admonition:: Example code
    :class: toggle

    .. literalinclude:: ../examples/observation_photo_metadata.py
        :lines: 1,19-
