docs/reference.rst, before:

Reference
=========

iNaturalist actually provides two APIs:

- the `REST API <https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/api+reference>`_ that they also use internally: it is very complete
  and provides read/write access, but is rather slow and sometimes inconsistent.
- the `Node-based API <https://api.inaturalist.org/v1/docs/>`_ allows searching and returning core data, is faster and
  provides more consistent returned results than the REST API, but has less features.

Pyinaturalist provides functions to use both of those APIs.

.. note::

    While not mandatory, it is considered good practice in the iNaturalist community to set a custom `user-agent <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_agent>`_ header to your API
    calls. That allows iNaturalist to identify "who's doing what" with their APIs, and maybe contact you back in case they want to start
    a discussion about how you use them.

    It is recommended to set this user-agent field to either something that identifies the project (MyCoolAndroidApp/2.0) or its
    contact person (Jane Doe, iNat user XXXXXX, jane@doe.net).

    Pyinaturalist therefore provides a couple of features to make that easy:

    .. code-block:: python

        import pyinaturalist
        from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_observation

        pyinaturalist.user_agent = "MyCoolAndroidApp/2.0 (using Pyinaturalist)"

        # From now on, all API calls will use this user-agent.

        t = get_access_token('username', 'password', 'app_id', 'app_secret')
        do_something_else()
        get_observation(observation_id=1234)
        ...

    In the rare cases where you want to use multiple user agents in your script, you can configure it per call:

    .. code-block:: python

        get_observation(observation_id=16227955, user_agent='AnotherUserAgent')

    (All functions that communicate with the API accept the `user_agent` optional parameter).

    If you don't configure the user agent, `Pyinaturalist/<VERSION>` will be used.

Commit message:

Update Development Status section in docs and fill in some missing function docstrings

docs/reference.rst, after:

.. _reference-docs:

Reference
=========

iNaturalist actually provides two APIs:

- The original, `Rails-based REST API <https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/api+reference>`_
  that they also use internally: it is very complete and provides read/write access, but is rather
  slow and sometimes inconsistent.
- The `Node-based API <https://api.inaturalist.org/v1/docs/>`_ allows read-only access to most
  iNaturalist resources, is faster and provides more consistent behavior than the REST API, but with
  fewer features.

Pyinaturalist provides functions to use both of those APIs. Main API usage information can be found
in :py:mod:`.node_api` and :py:mod:`.rest_api`. Docs for additional supporting modules can also be found below.

.. Note: module docs are generated by sphinx-apidoc
.. toctree::
    :caption: Module Documentation
    :glob:

    modules/*


.. note::

    While not mandatory, it is considered good practice in the iNaturalist community to set a custom `user-agent <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_agent>`_ header to your API
    calls. That allows iNaturalist to identify "who's doing what" with their APIs, and maybe contact you back in case they want to start
    a discussion about how you use them.

    It is recommended to set this user-agent field to either something that identifies the project (MyCoolAndroidApp/2.0) or its
    contact person (Jane Doe, iNat user XXXXXX, jane@doe.net).

    Pyinaturalist therefore provides a couple of features to make that easy:

    .. code-block:: python

        import pyinaturalist
        from pyinaturalist.node_api import get_observation

        pyinaturalist.user_agent = "MyCoolAndroidApp/2.0 (using Pyinaturalist)"

        # From now on, all API calls will use this user-agent.

        t = get_access_token('username', 'password', 'app_id', 'app_secret')
        do_something_else()
        get_observation(observation_id=1234)
        ...

    In the rare cases where you want to use multiple user agents in your script, you can configure it per call:

    .. code-block:: python

        get_observation(observation_id=16227955, user_agent='AnotherUserAgent')

    (All functions that communicate with the API accept the `user_agent` optional parameter).

    If you don't configure the user agent, `Pyinaturalist/<VERSION>` will be used.
